[RF-DOCS] Rails Plugin (#14)
Ridhwana/rails: guides/source/plugins.md

The Basics of Creating Rails Plugins
====================================

This guide is for developers who want to create a Rails plugin, in order to extend or modify the behavior of a Rails application.

After reading this guide, you will know:

> * What Rails plugins are.
> * When to use a Rails plugin.

Reviewer: Maybe simpler combined? (feel free to ignore)
```suggestion
* What Rails plugins are and when to use them.
```

Author: ✅

* How to create a plugin from scratch.
* How to extend core Ruby classes.
* How to add methods to `ApplicationRecord`.
* How to publish your plugin to RubyGems.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

What are Plugins?

> ------------------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-----------------
```

A Rails plugin is a gem that's designed specifically to work inside a Rails
application, often using `Railtie` or `Engine` to hook into the Rails boot
process and extend the framework's functionality.

> Plugins serve several purposes:

Reviewer: It maybe worth adding something here to distinguish plugins and engines upfront here (while also linking to the engines guide). It may benefit the reader to clarify this as it can bit confusing. Something like this:

"A Rails Plugin is a broader term that refers to any packaged extension to a Rails application. Plugins can include Engines but can also be simpler – like monkey patches, custom rake tasks, or concerns. Creating a plugin and creating an engine are similar because Rails engines are implemented as plugins under the hood. The distinction mostly comes from what features you include. Plugins are used for smaller customization or extensions."

Author: ✅

* They offer a way for developers to experiment with new ideas without affecting the stability of the core codebase.
* They support a modular architecture, allowing features to be maintained, updated, or released independently.
* They give teams an outlet for introducing powerful features without needing to
  include everything directly into the framework.

Generator Options
------------------

> Currently, Rails plugins are built as gems, _gemified plugins_. They can be

Reviewer 2: I'm not aware of any plans to  support alternative ways to built plugins, so we can probably remove "Currently":
```suggestion
Rails plugins are built as gems, _gemified plugins_. They can be
```

shared across different Rails applications using RubyGems and Bundler if
desired.

The `rails plugin new` command supports several options that determine what type of plugin structure is generated.

The **Basic Plugin** (default) option creates a minimal plugin structure suitable for simple extensions like core class methods or utility functions.

```bash
$ rails plugin new api_boost
```

> This is what we'll use in this guide.

Reviewer: Something like this to distinguish the focus of this guide vs. the other guide?

```suggestion
This is what we'll use in this guide. There other two options, `--full` and `--mountable`, which are covered in the Rails Engines guide.
```

Author: ✅

│   │   ├── db/
│   │   ├── public/
│   │   └── ... (full Rails application)
│   ├── integration/
│   └── test_helper.rb
├── MIT-LICENSE
└── README.md
```

**The `lib` directory** contains your plugin's source code:
- `lib/api_boost.rb` is the main entry point for your plugin
- `lib/api_boost/` contains modules and classes for your plugin functionality
- `lib/tasks/` contains any Rake tasks your plugin provides

**The `test/dummy` directory** contains a complete Rails application that's used for testing your plugin. This dummy application:
- Loads your plugin automatically through the Gemfile
- Provides a Rails environment to test your plugin's integration
- Includes generators, models, controllers, and views as needed for testing
- Can be used interactively with `rails console` and `rails server`

**The gemspec file** (`api_boost.gemspec`) defines your gem's metadata, dependencies, and which files to include when packaging.

### Set Up the Plugin

Navigate to the directory that contains the plugin, and edit `api_boost.gemspec` to
replace any lines that have `TODO` values:

```ruby
spec.homepage    = "http://example.com"
spec.summary     = "Summary of ApiBoost."

> spec.description = "Description of ApiBoost."

Reviewer 2: Might as well show an actual summary and description here:
```suggestion
spec.summary     = "Enhance your API endpoints"
spec.description = "Adds common API functionality like request throttling, response caching, and automatic API documentation."
```

WARNING: Before proceeding, it's important to understand that extending core
classes (like String, Array, Hash, etc.) should be used sparingly, if at all.
Core class extensions can be brittle, dangerous, and are often
unnecessary.<br></br> They can:</br>
- Cause naming conflicts when multiple gems extend the same class with the same
  method name</br>
- Break unexpectedly when Ruby or Rails updates change core class behavior</br>
- Make debugging difficult because it's not obvious where methods come from</br>
- Create coupling issues between your plugin and other code<br></br> Better
alternatives to consider:</br>
- Create utility modules or helper classes instead</br>
- Use composition over monkey patching</br>
- Implement functionality as instance methods on your own classes<br></br> For
more details on why core class extensions can be problematic, see [The Case
Against Monkey
Patching](https://shopify.engineering/the-case-against-monkey-patching).
<br></br> That said, understanding how core class extensions work is valuable.
The example below demonstrates the technique, but they should be used sparingly

> - consider whether it's the right approach for your specific use case.

Reviewer 2: Are these `<br>`s required for layout?

Author: Yeah, it allows me to have this block formatted like this:

![CleanShot 2025-06-08 at 23 37 14@2x](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cd9718eb-08ae-4f03-b57d-0d11f74e191f)

Is there a better way to do this?

Reviewer: I wonder if the warning needs be this lengthy? The first paragraph seems like it conveys the point.

Author: I usually prefer not to call something unfavourable without also sharing a bit of context, like why it might not be ideal or what the alternatives could be. With that being said, I agree that this is a bit lengthy 😅

In this example you will add a method to String named `to_throttled_response`.

In `lib/api_boost.rb`, add `require "api_boost/core_ext"`:

```ruby
# api_boost/lib/api_boost.rb

require "api_boost/version"
require "api_boost/railtie"
require "api_boost/core_ext"

module ApiBoost
  # Your code goes here...
end
```

Create the `core_ext.rb` file and add the `to_throttled_response` method:

```ruby
# api_boost/lib/api_boost/core_ext.rb

class String
  def to_throttled_response(limit = "60 requests per hour")
    {
      data: self,
      rate_limit: limit
    }
  end
end

> ```

Reviewer 2: I think a rate limit example is a good idea, but I'm not sure this extension on String is typical.
Maybe I'm misunderstanding the use case?

Does this just add the rate limit field to JSON payloads without doing any actual rate limiting?
If so, would it make sense to have it return JSON?
````suggestion
class String
  def to_throttled_json(message = "60 requests per hour")
    {
      data: self,
      rate_limit: message
    }.to_json
  end
end
```
````

It's pretty difficult to think of an example extending a core class that is both simple and useful.

Another example could be adding method to Integer so you can define a RateLimit with `10.requests_per_hour`?
Similar to `5.days` or 3.megabytes`:
```suggestion
ApiBoost::RateLimit = Data.define(:requests, :per)

class Integer
  def requests_per_hour
    ApiBoost::RateLimit.new(self, :hour)
  end
end
```
```

Reviewer: I like the 2nd example.

Author: I like second example as well, updated ✅

To see this in action, change to the `test/dummy` directory, start `bin/rails console`, and test the API response formatting:

```irb
$ cd test/dummy
$ bin/rails console

irb> "Hello API".to_throttled_response
=> {:data=>"Hello API", :rate_limit=>"60 requests per hour"}

irb> "User data".to_throttled_response("100 requests per hour")
=> {:data=>"User data", :rate_limit=>"100 requests per hour"}

> ```

Reviewer: It might be clearer for this codeblock to only have the `irb>` lines. The `cd` and `bin/rails` can be inline in the text or separate `bash` codeblock? (Sorry not able to use "suggest change" on this part)

Author: ✅

The dummy application automatically loads your plugin, so any extensions you add are immediately available for testing.

Add an "acts_as" Method to Active Record
----------------------------------------

A common pattern in plugins is to add a method called `acts_as_something` to models. In this case, you
want to write a method called `acts_as_api_resource` that adds API-specific functionality to your Active Record models.

To begin, set up your files so that you have:

```ruby
# api_boost/lib/api_boost.rb

require "api_boost/version"
require "api_boost/railtie"
require "api_boost/core_ext"
require "api_boost/acts_as_api_resource"

module ApiBoost
  # Your code goes here...
end
```

```ruby
# api_boost/lib/api_boost/acts_as_api_resource.rb

module ApiBoost
  module ActsAsApiResource
    extend ActiveSupport::Concern

    class_methods do
      def acts_as_api_resource(options = {})
        cattr_accessor :api_timestamp_field, default: (options[:api_timestamp_field] || :last_request_at).to_s

>       end

Reviewer 2: Keywords arguments are probably preferred as they are also easier to document:
```suggestion
      def acts_as_api_resource(api_timestamp_field: :last_request_at)
        cattr_accessor :api_timestamp_field, default: api_timestamp_field.to_s
      end
```

    end
  end

> end

Reviewer: Would it make sense to add when and how you'd use this `acts_as_api_resource`. Not really clear on what this example is demonstrating..

Author: Good call, updated to make this more clear ✅

```

The code above uses `ActiveSupport::Concern` to simplify including modules with both class and instance methods. Methods in the `class_methods` block become class methods when the module is included. For more details, see the [ActiveSupport::Concern API documentation](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveSupport/Concern.html).

### Add a Class Method

This plugin will expect that you've added a method to your model named `last_request_at`. However, the
plugin users might have already defined a method on their model named `last_request_at` that they use
for something else. This plugin will allow the name to be changed by adding a class method called `api_timestamp_field`.

We need to generate some models in our "dummy" Rails application to test this functionality. Run the following commands from the `test/dummy` directory:

```bash
$ cd test/dummy
$ bin/rails generate model User last_request_at:datetime

> $ bin/rails generate model Product last_request_at:datetime last_api_call:datetime

Reviewer 2: I'm a bit unsure if we should create 2 models here.
It's nice to show the `:api_timestamp_field` option, but it makes the example a bit more complex as well.
It makes sense for testing both cases, but that could probably also work with just the Product model with both fields?
If we keep both models we can skip the `last_request_at:datetime` for Product as it won't be used.

Author: Updated to only reference the Product model ✅.

$ bin/rails db:migrate
```

Now update the User and Product models so that they know that they are supposed to act like API resources:

```ruby
# test/dummy/app/models/user.rb

class User < ApplicationRecord
  acts_as_api_resource
end
```

```ruby
# test/dummy/app/models/product.rb

class Product < ApplicationRecord
  acts_as_api_resource api_timestamp_field: :last_api_call
end
```

> We need to include our module in `ApplicationRecord`:

Reviewer 2: Maybe mention we'll solve this differently later on?
```suggestion
We need to include our module in `ApplicationRecord` (later on we'll look at doing this automatically):
```

=> "last_request_at"

irb> Product.api_timestamp_field
=> "last_api_call"
```

### Add an Instance Method

This plugin will add a method named 'track_api_request' to any Active Record object that calls `acts_as_api_resource`. The 'track_api_request'
method will set the timestamp of when an API request was made to track usage patterns.

Update `acts_as_api_resource.rb` to include the instance method:

```ruby
# api_boost/lib/api_boost/acts_as_api_resource.rb

module ApiBoost
  module ActsAsApiResource
    extend ActiveSupport::Concern

    included do
      def track_api_request(timestamp = Time.current)
        write_attribute(self.class.api_timestamp_field, timestamp)
      end
    end

    class_methods do
      def acts_as_api_resource(options = {})
        cattr_accessor :api_timestamp_field, default: (options[:api_timestamp_field] || :last_request_at).to_s
      end
    end
  end
end
```

Now you can test the functionality in the Rails console:

```irb
irb> user = User.new
irb> user.track_api_request
irb> user.last_request_at
=> 2025-06-01 10:30:45 UTC

irb> product = Product.new
irb> product.track_api_request
irb> product.last_api_call
=> 2025-06-01 10:31:15 UTC
```

> NOTE: The use of `write_attribute` to write to the field in model is just one example of how a plugin can interact with the model, and will not always be the right method to use. For example, you could also use:

Reviewer: I had to dig around to figure what this Note refers to. I think it's referring to line 359? If so, might make sense to move it closer or mention the whole line inline here to make it clear.

Author: ✅

```ruby
send("#{self.class.api_timestamp_field}=", timestamp)
```

Advanced Integration: Using Railties

> -----------------------------------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
------------------------------------
```

> The plugin we've built so far works great for basic functionality. However, if your plugin needs to integrate more deeply with Rails' framework, you'll want to use a [Railtie](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/Rails/Railtie.html).

Reviewer: Nit
```suggestion
The plugin we've built so far works great for basic functionality. However, if the plugin needs to integrate more deeply with Rails' framework, you'll want to use a [Railtie](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/Rails/Railtie.html).
```

Author: ✅
